---
layout: post
title: "Assign an automatic JMX port to a Java application"
---

[VisualVM](http://visualvm.java.net/) and
[jconsole](http://openjdk.java.net/tools/svc/jconsole/) are two useful tools
for debugging JVM issues. However they both rely on a JMX port to be open on
the remote instance.  You can work around this on the fly by running `jstatd` on
the remote host, but you'll find certain things disabled. So ideally, the jmx
port will be enabled on startup.

This can be accomplished by doing something like this:

{% highlight bash %}
$ java  -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.port=1080 \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.local.only=false \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.authenticate=false \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.ssl=false \
        -jar MyApp.jar
{% endhighlight %}

Then connecting via jmx to port 1080 on the remote host.

## Automated deployments

The problem with this approach becomes quickly apparent in an automated
environment. If two applications are deployed on the same machine and they both
try to open a 1080 port, one of them will fail. This conflict can also arise
from non-obvious services, like running an ActiveMQ broker which [by
default](http://activemq.apache.org/jmx.html) opens a 1080 port.

The obvious next step is to try and assign a unique jmx port to each instance by
hand. This is doable, but can quickly become a mess unless you develop some
sort of jmx port registry system.

Fortunately there is a better way.

## Ephemeral ports

Hotspot and openjdk have had an undocumented feature where setting
`com.sun.management.jmxremote.port=0` will cause the jvm to ask the OS to
assign an ephemeral port. This will guarantee an unused port.

This has been around for years, so I don't expect it to change. But being
undocumented, you never know.

## What port?

If you're familiar with the usual unix tools, you should know that you can use
something like `lsof` to figure out the port being used:

{% highlight bash %}
$ jps -l # figure out pid
$ lsof -p <pid> -n -i
{% endhighlight %}

Another approach that is more script / human friendly is to enable logging of
the jmx server component. Once enabled it will print out the jmx port on startup
to standard out. This can be done with a simple java.util.logging.config.file:

{% highlight properties %}
# logging.properties
handlers= java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler
.level= INFO
java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.level = CONFIG
java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.formatter = java.util.logging.SimpleFormatter
sun.management.jmxremote.level = CONFIG
{% endhighlight %}

Then modify the command line to specify the properties file and set the jmx port
to 0:

{% highlight bash %}
$ java  -Djava.util.logging.config.file=logging.properties
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.port=0 \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.local.only=false \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.authenticate=false \
        -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.ssl=false \
        -jar MyApp.jar
{% endhighlight %}

You should see the jmx port printed at startup as a CONFIG message:

`CONFIG: JMX Connector ready at: service:jmx:rmi:///jndi/rmi://disaster:39148/jmxrmi`

Here the process got assigned _39148_. This can be further processed by scripts
to display the port on a webpage for quick access.
